Project Gutenberg's London in the Time of the Stuarts, by Walter Besant

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: London in the Time of the Stuarts

Author: Walter Besant

Release Date: June 19, 2019 [EBook #59782]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LONDON IN THE TIME OF THE STUARTS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Robert Tonsing, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)







[Illustration: CHARLES I (1600–1649)

From the painting by van Dyck in the National Gallery, London.]




                                LONDON
                      IN THE TIME OF THE STUARTS


                                  BY
                           SIR WALTER BESANT

                            [Illustration]

                                LONDON
                         ADAM & CHARLES BLACK
                                 1903




                                PREFACE


Abundant as is the mass of material for the study of history and
manners in the sixteenth century,[1] there is even a greater abundance
for the history, political and social, of the century of the Stuarts.
There are, however, two difficulties to be faced in such an inquiry.
The first is that the history of London is far more closely connected
with the history of the nation during the seventeenth than during the
sixteenth century. It may, indeed, be advanced that at no time, not
even when London deposed Richard II. and set up Henry IV., was the City
so closely involved in all the events of the time as in the seventeenth
century. The City at that time reached the highest point of its
political importance, an importance which vanished in the century that
followed.

Therefore the historian of London has before him the broad fact that
for sixty years, viz. from the accession of Charles I. to the expulsion
of James II., he should be pursuing the history of the country. In
this place, however, there is not space for such a history; it has
already been well told by many historians; and I have neither the time
nor the competence to write the history of this most eventful period.
I have therefore found it necessary to assume a certain knowledge
of events and to speak of their sequence with reference especially
to the attitude of the City; the forces which acted on the people;
their ideas; their resolution and tenacity under Charles I.; their
servility and obedience under Charles II.; and their final rejection
of the doctrines of passive resistance, Divine right, and obedience
which made the departure of James possible, and opened the door for
constitutional government and the liberties of the people.

The second difficulty is, that while the century contains an
immense mass of material in the shape of plays, poems, fiction,
pamphlets, sermons, travels, sketches, biographies, trials, reports,
proclamations, ordinances, speeches, and every other conceivable
document for the restoration of the century, the period was sharply
divided into two by the Civil Wars and the Protectorate, the latter
being at best a stop-gap, while events were following each other and
the mind of the nation was developing. It was, in fact, a revolutionary
change which took place. The change was deepened by the Great Fire of
1666, after which a new London arose, not so picturesque, perhaps,
as the former London, but reflecting the ideas of the time in its
churches, which, from Mass houses became preaching rooms; and in
its houses, which offered substantial comfort, more light, loftier
rooms, standing in wider and better ordered streets, agreeing with
the increase of wealth and the improvement in the general conditions
of life. The first half of the century is, in fact, a continuation of
the Elizabethan period with decay in literature and development in
religion; the second half belongs to the eighteenth century, where we
find a development of the last forty years of the seventeenth.

I have endeavoured to meet this difficulty by making such a selection
from the things belonging to the daily life as have not been dwelt upon
in the study of the sixteenth century with those points which, while
they were developed or dropped in the eighteenth, have not been in that
volume considered at length.

The events of the greatest importance to the City, apart from those
which belong to the whole nation, were the repeated visitations of
Plague, and the Great Fire. The former came and went; it destroyed
the people, chiefly the common people, by thousands; its immediate
effect was a dearth of craftsmen and servants, a rise in wages, and an
improvement in the standard of life in the lower levels. The lessons
which it taught and continually enforced were learned most imperfectly.
They were simple—the admission into the courts and lanes of the crowded
City of light and air; the invention of some system of sanitation
which would replace the old cesspool and the public latrine; and the
introduction of a plentiful supply of water for the washing of the
people, as well as for their drink and for the flooding of the streets.
Somewhere or other—it must be between Dowgate and Mincing Lane—there is
still existing under ground the great Roman Cloaca; it is an additional
proof of the desertion and desolation of the City after the Romans went
away that the Cloaca was forgotten, choked up, and its mouth covered
over; the creation of the foreshore covered it up. Had it been found,
say, in the thirteenth or fourteenth century, the whole modern sanitary
system might have been invented and developed by its means, and so the
Plague would have been stayed. I have attempted to present an adequate
account of the Plague from contemporary evidence. As regards the Fire I
have essayed a restoration of the City before and after that event.

Turning to events political, I have already stated the difficulties
which confront the historian of London in this century. The reader
will not look here for a detailed history of the Civil War or the
Protectorate. I hope, however, that he will find some indication of
the way in which the people of London regarded the events which were
working out their redemption for them, in ways which were unexpected,
by trials which were hard to bear, and after a time when all seemed
lost.

Considering London alone, the Restoration seems to me to have been
a natural, a wholesome, and a most fortunate reaction against the
successive rule of Presbyterian, Independent, and Captain or Colonel.
It must have become quite clear even to men like Milton, who was one
of the last to lift his voice against the return of a king, that a
Commonwealth was too far in advance of the people, and that a military
despotism was intolerable.

In the same way the Revolution was a swing back of the pendulum; it was
quite as natural and as salutary as the rebellion against Charles and
the Restoration of his son. I read this lesson clearly in the history
of London, and I assume it for the history of the country.

Meantime let it be remembered that the seventeenth century secured the
country for two hundred years, _i.e._ to the present day at least,
and, so far as can be prophesied, for an indefinite period yet to come,
from the personal interference of the sovereign. That is an enormous
gain to the country. We are no longer called upon to discuss the
Prerogative. The attempted encroachments of George III. appear as mere
trifles compared with the monstrous claims of Charles the First and the
almost incredible acts of tyranny recorded of his son and successor.
And in the achievement of this great result London in the seventeenth
century played a noble part and earned the deepest gratitude of all
those who came, or shall come, after.

                                                       WALTER BESANT.




                               CONTENTS


                           STUART SOVEREIGNS

  CHAP.                                                             PAGE

   1. JAMES I.                                                         3

   2. CHARLES I.                                                      22

   3. THE CITY AND THE CIVIL WAR                                      53

   4. THE COMMONWEALTH                                                64

   5. THE RESTORATION                                                 74

   6. THE REIGN                                                       82

   7. JAMES II.                                                      103

   8. WILLIAM III.                                                   117

   9. QUEEN ANNE                                                     127


                    RELIGION, GOVERNMENT, AND TRADE

   1. RELIGION                                                       137

   2. THE CHURCH AND DISSENT                                         154

   3. SUPERSTITIONS                                                  159

   4. SANCTUARY                                                      168

   5. CITY GOVERNMENT AND USAGES                                     172

   6. TRADE                                                          190

   7. IRISH ESTATES                                                  206


                       THE GREAT PLAGUE AND FIRE

   1. THE PLAGUE                                                     215

   2. PLAGUE AND MEDICINE                                            233

   3. ASPECT OF THE CITY BEFORE THE FIRE                             240

   4. THE FIRE OF LONDON                                             244

   5. CONTEMPORARY EVIDENCE                                          258

   6. LONDON AFTER THE FIRE                                          269


                          MANNERS AND CUSTOMS

   1. FOOD AND DRINK                                                 287

   2. DRESS AND MANNERS                                              298

   3. WEDDINGS AND FUNERALS                                          308

   4. PLACES OF RESORT                                               311

   5. THEATRE AND ART                                                318

   6. SPORT AND AMUSEMENTS                                           328

   7. COACHES                                                        338

   8. PUNISHMENT AND CRIME                                           345

   9. PUBLIC MORALITY                                                355

  10. GENERAL NOTES                                                  359


                              APPENDICES

   1. THE COURT                                                      365

   2. LIST OF LONDON CLERGY EJECTED                                  371

   3. ALMSHOUSES                                                     374

   4. COMPOSITION OF THE LORDS AND COMMONS                           376

   5. ENLARGEMENT OF THE STREETS                                     377

   6. THE NEW BUILDINGS OF LONDON                                    380

   7. GARDENS                                                        383


  INDEX                                                              387

  KEY TO OGILBY AND MORGAN’S MAP OF LONDON, 1677                     397




                             ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                    PAGE

  Charles I.                                              _Frontispiece_

  James I.                                                             3

  Triumphal Arch erected at the time of the Coronation of James I.     4

  The Gunpowder Conspirators                                           7

  Gunpowder Treason                                                    8

  King James I. Entertaining the Spanish Ambassador at Whitehall      10

  Henry, Prince of Wales                                              11

  A Facsimile of the Order for the Burning of the Book of Sports      14

  The Destruction of Cheapside Cross and the Burning of the Book
        of Sports                                                     16

  Charles I.                                                          22

  Cheapside—Queen Henrietta Maria’s Entry into London                 23

  Henrietta Maria                                                     26

  George Villiers, First Duke (Second Creation) of Buckingham         30

  King Charles I. Thrown Overboard                                    36

  “England’s Miraculous Preservation Emblematically Described”        38

  “The True Maner of the Execution of Thomas Earle of Strafford”      39

  Thomas Wentworth, First Earl of Strafford                           40

  A Plan of London and Westminster after the Fire                     41

  A Soldier of the Time of King James the First armed with a
        Caliver                                                       45

  The Trial of King Charles I.                          _Facing page_ 46

  Sir Thomas Fairfax and his Wife                                     48

  Trial of King Charles I.                                            49

  Execution of Charles I.                                             51

  Prince Rupert                                                       60

  Cromwell Dissolving Parliament                                      65

  Hackney Coachman                                                    66

  Oliver Cromwell                                                     67

  General Monk, First Duke of Albemarle                               69

  View of General Monk’s House in Grub Street                         70

  Letter from General Monk to the Speaker of Parliament (facsimile)   71

  Mob at Temple Bar                                                   74

  The Coronation of Charles II. in Westminster Abbey    _Facing page_ 76

  Charles II.                                                         77

  Incidents in the Rebellion of the Fifth Monarchy Men under
        Thomas Venner, and the Execution of their Leaders             79

  Hungerford Market, near York Buildings, Strand        _Facing page_ 88

  “The Solemn Mock Procession of the Pope, Cardinalls, Jesuits,
        Fryers, etc., through ye City of London”                      90

  Lord Mayor and Aldermen                                             93

  Nell Gwynne                                                        101

  The Coronation of James II. in Westminster Abbey     _Facing page_ 102

  Titus Oates Flogged at the Cart Tail                               103

  Titus Oates in the Pillory                                         104

  Duke of Monmouth                                                   105

  The Execution of Monmouth                                          106

  James II.                                                          109

  The Seven Bishops on the Way to the Tower                          111

  Parliament in the reign of James II.                               112

  Judge Jeffreys                                                     113

  The Arrest of Jeffreys                                             115

  Entry of the Prince of Orange into London            _Facing page_ 116

  William III.                                                       119

  Mary II.                                                           120

  London Street Cries                                                123

  Queen Anne                                                         127

  Thanksgiving Service in St. Paul’s                                 129

  Henry Sacheverell, D.D.                                            132

  St. Paul’s Cross                                                   138

  William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury                             140

  A Trimmer                                                          142

  Execution of William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury                143

  John Bunyan’s Meeting-house, Zoar-street, Gravel-lane,
        Southwark                                                    154

  Touching for King’s Evil                                           165

  St. Bartholomew’s                                                  170

  Warwick House, Cloth Fair                                          173

  Craven House, Drury Lane                                           174

  Arundel House                                                      175

  Cornhill, London                                                   180

  Watchman—Bellman                                                   181

  The Apprentices’ Enforced Toilet                     _Facing page_ 188

  Custom House                                                       191

  “The Soveraigne of the Seas”                                       192

  The First Royal Exchange—Exterior and Interior       _Facing page_ 196

  Coins of the Period                                  _Facing page_ 200

  Old Grocers’ Hall used for Bank of England                         201

  A Perspective View of the Bank of England                          203

  Paul Pindar’s House                                  _Facing page_ 211

  Lord Craven                                                        219

  Rescued from the Plague                              _Facing page_ 220

  Samuel Pepys                                                       221

  Daniel Defoe                                                       224

  Part of Cheapside with the Cross, etc., as they Appeared in
        1660                                                         241

  The Great Fire of London                                           245

  The Cathedral Church of St. Paul as it was before ye Fire of
        London                                                       247

  A View of the Monument of London, in Remembrance of the
        Dreadful Fire in 1666                                        249

  A Plan of the City and Liberties of London after the Dreadful
        Conflagration in the Year 1666       _Between pages_ 252 and 253

  Sir Christopher Wren                                               254

  Sir John Evelyn’s Plan for Rebuilding the City of London after
        the Great Fire in 1666                                       255

  Sir Christopher Wren’s Plan for Rebuilding the City of London
        after the Dreadful Conflagration in 1666                     255

  John Evelyn                                                        259

  The Great Fire of London                             _Facing page_ 260

  Temple Bar, the West side                                          263

  London after the Fire                      _Between pages_ 268 and 269

  Somerset Palace, 1650                                              270

  Durham House, Salisbury House, and Worcester House                 271

  The Charter House Hospital                                         273

  Newgate, 1650                                                      277

  Remains of Prince Rupert’s Palace, Beech Street                    279

  St. Ethelburga within Bishopsgate                                  281

  Specimen of Armorial Architecture                                  282

  House in Great St. Helen’s formerly the Residence of Sir Jno.
        Lawrance, Lord Mayor of London A.D. 1665                     288

  Tavern Scene                                                       292

  Two Costume Portraits                                              298

  An English Lady of Quality—Lady of the Court of England            300

  Citizen’s Wife—Citizen’s Daughter                                  301

  English Gentlewoman—Noble Gentlewoman of England                   303

  Maypole Dance in the Time of Charles I.                            305

  Merchant’s Daughter—Merchant’s Wife of London                      306

  Procession in the City                                             306

  “Corpe Bearer”                                                     309

  St. James’s Park                                                   313

  Interior of St. Paul’s                                             316

  Inside of the Duke’s Theatre, Lincoln’s Inn Fields                 320

  Inside of the Red Bull Playhouse                                   322

  Musical Instruments of the Period                    _Facing page_ 326

  Sports of the Period                                 _Facing page_ 328

  Dress of the Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress of London in 1640        333

  Coaches in St. James’s Park                                        339




                              SOVEREIGNS




                               CHAPTER I

                                JAMES I


James found the City, after a hundred years of Tudor rule, reduced to
an admirable condition of submission and loyalty. He was proclaimed in
the City and by the City, the citizens of London claiming once more a
voice in electing an accessor to the crown. The King returned thanks to
the Mayor and Aldermen in a letter which lacks, one perceives at once,
the royal style of Elizabeth.

[Illustration: JAMES I. (1566–1625)

After the portrait by Paul von Somer.]

  Trustie and Wel-beloved, wee greet you hartily well: being informed
  of your great forwardnesse in that just and honourable action of
  proclaiming us your sovereigne Lord and King, immediately after
  the decease of our late dearest Sister, the Queen; wherein you
  have given a singular good proofe of your ancient fidelitie (a
  reputation hereditary to that our Citie of London), being the
  chamber of our imperial crowne, and ever free from all shadowes of
  tumultes, and unlawful courses; we could not omit, with all the
  speed possible we might, to give you hereby a taste of our thankful
  Mind for the same: and with all assurance, that you cannot crave
  anything of us fit for the Maintenance of you all in general, and
  every one of you in particular, but it shall be most willingly
  performed by us, whose speciall care shall ever be to provide for
  the continuance and increase of your present happines, desiring
  you in the mean time to go constantly forward in all doing, in and
  whatsoever things you shall find necessary and expedient for the
  good Government of our sayde city, in execution of justice, as you
  have been used to doe in our sayde deceased Sister’s tyme, till our
  pleasure be known to you in the contrary. Thus not doubting but
  you will doe, as you may be fully assured of our gratious favours
  towards you, in the first degree, we bid you hartily farewell. Haly
  Roodhouse, the 28th of March, 1603.

[Illustration: TRIUMPHAL ARCH ERECTED AT THE TIME OF THE CORONATION OF
JAMES I.

From a contemporary print. E. Gardner’s collection.]

James left Edinburgh on the 5th of April, arriving at Theobalds, where
he rested for four days, on May the 7th; it had taken more than a month
to ride from Edinburgh, _i.e._ he had ridden about twelve miles a day.
At Waltham he was met by one of the sheriffs with sixty servants; at
Stamford Hill by the Mayor and Aldermen in velvet and gold chains and
500 citizens richly apparelled. At that moment the Plague broke out;
the Coronation was shorn of its splendour; the pageants and shows were
laid aside; only the Mayor, Aldermen, and twelve citizens were present
in Westminster Abbey; and James had to postpone his public entry into
the City for a twelvemonth.

With the accession of James revived the hopes of the Catholics; they
built upon the inexperience and the ignorance of the King; perhaps
upon his fears; they magnified their own strength and numbers; and
they quite misunderstood the feeling of the country, which grew
more and more in distrust and hatred of the Catholics. They began,
moreover, just as they had done in the reign of Elizabeth, by plots
and conspiracies. The first of these plots was that called the “Main,”
in which Raleigh, unfortunately for himself and his own reputation,
was concerned. With him was Lord Cobham. As to Raleigh’s guilt, this
is not the place to inquire. As is well known, after twelve years he
was suffered to come out of the Tower, and was allowed to command a
fleet bound for the coast of South America in quest of gold-mines. The
story of his voyage, of his ill success, of his son’s death, of his
return, of his arrest, may be read in the history of England. But the
tragedy of October 29, 1618, when at eight o’clock in the morning Sir
Walter Raleigh was led out to die, moved to the depths every English
heart, and should not be passed over in any history of London. It was
remembered by all that he was the lifelong enemy of Spain, nor could
the attacking of a friendly power in time of peace appear as any other
than a laudable act to the English mind. That the traitor who arrested
and betrayed him, his kinsman who became a paid spy, who also took
money from the very man he was watching, that this man, Sir Lewis
Stukeley, afterwards fell into misery and madness appeared to everybody
an open and visible punishment inflicted by God Himself.

Let us consider the meaning of the fines which play so large a part
in the history of these times. If a man is a Roman Catholic he is on
no account allowed to attend a church or assembly where any kind of
service other than the Catholic is performed. That rule is never, I
believe, relaxed under any circumstances. It is a rule, therefore,
which can be easily used for the discovery of Catholics. Thus (23
Elizabeth) it was enacted that every person over sixteen years of
age who should refrain from attending at church, chapel, or some
usual place of common prayer, against the tenor of a certain statute
of the first year of her Majesty’s reign, for uniformity of common
prayer, and should be lawfully convicted thereof, should forfeit, for
each month in which he or she should so refrain, the sum of twenty
pounds of lawful money. The convictions under this statute illustrate
to some extent the proportion of Roman Catholics to Protestants
then existing in the country. Thus in the Middlesex Session Rolls
(Middlesex County Record Society) may be found a long list of persons
brought before the Middlesex magistrates charged with this offence.
During the last twenty-four years of Queen Elizabeth’s reign there
were 408 convictions of this offence in Middlesex alone. They were
gentlemen and gentlewomen, clerks, yeomen, tradesmen, wives, widows,
and spinsters. They came from many parts of Middlesex, but especially
from Westminster, Clerkenwell, Tottenham, Stepney, and Holborn. A fine
of twenty pounds a month—about £100 of our money—would be far beyond
the means of most of the persons convicted. For instance, on one page
of the Rolls there are the names of twenty-six persons all convicted
of not going to church for two or three months. Of these, twelve are
gentlemen, three are wives of gentlemen, five are yeomen, one is a
spinster, four are clerks, and one is a cook. What happened when the
fine could not be paid? The number of convictions proves, first, that
there were some, but not, in proportion to the whole, many Roman
Catholics left in London and the parts around; next, that they were
easily detected by their absence from church; thirdly, that there was
a hot search after them; and fourthly, that though we find, here and
there, a person following a trade or a craft, the Catholics were for
the most part gentlefolk.

The secret professors of the ancient faith knew of places where a
priest was concealed, and where Mass was sung or whispered with closed
doors. There were five or six of these priests tried and condemned
before the Middlesex magistrates. Thus John Welden in March 1587,
William Hartley in 1588, Robert Walkinson in 1598 were tried and found
guilty simply for being priests, _i.e._ because, “being subjects of
the Queen, they were ordained by authority derived from the See of
Rome, in contempt of the Crown and Dignity of the said Queen.” They
were executed as traitors with the cruelties of detail which we know.
Other persons were charged with receiving, comforting, and maintaining
priests. Thus George Glover and Mary Baylie his wife maintained and
comforted Thomas Tycheburne, clerk and priest, and they received the
pardon of the Queen; Catharine Bellamy, wife of Richard Bellamy,
gentleman, moved and seduced by instigation of the devil, received
and entertained Robert Southwell—it does not appear whether she was
punished for the offence; and Dorothea White, either sister or wife of
Humphrey White of Westminster, gentleman, thus received and entertained
William Tedder, priest. Dorothea was hanged—one supposes—because she
did not make submission.

If we inquire into the comparative importance of the recusants, it
seems that it must have been too small to constitute a real danger.
The number, 408, convicted in a quarter of a century over the whole
of Middlesex—London not included—that is, no more than an average of
sixteen in a year, at a time when the search after them was keen
and untiring—hardly warrants the fears which were entertained by the
Queen’s Council as to the power and numbers of the secret Catholics, or
the hopes of support from the south which were entertained during the
rising of the north; or the expectations at Rome and at the Court of
Spain of a widespread insurrection all over England and a return to the
ancient faith. At the same time it is reasonable to believe that there
were many thousands who, while they adhered outwardly, went to church
and heard the sermon, would have welcomed the return of the Mass and
the Romish form.

[Illustration: THE GUNPOWDER CONSPIRATORS

From title-page of _Warhafftige Beschreibung der Verrätherei, etc._ (De
Bry), Frankfurt, 1606.]

Action in the case of the recusants was followed by the famous
Gunpowder Plot. There can be no doubt that the Catholics were maddened
by disappointment, by persecution, by the failure to obtain toleration,
and by the fines to which they were subjected. The conspirators
proposed, as is well known, to blow up the King, the Lords, and the
Commons when the Parliament should assemble. This plot, like that of
Raleigh, belongs to the history of the country.

[Illustration: Gunpowder Treason.

From a contemporary print. E. Gardner’s collection.]

When the Common Council established a Court of Conscience in the City,
it was with the design of saving poor debtors from the costs of being
sued in the superior courts. But this Court was confined to debtors who
were Citizens and Freemen of London and the Liberties. Some persons,
intending to subvert the good and charitable intent of the Court, took
hold of certain ambiguous words and endeavoured by means of these to
render the intentions of the Court useless. A new and amending Act
was passed which cleared up these difficulties and put the Court of
Conscience on a sounder footing. The Act was well meant, but for more
than two hundred years after it the miserable annals of the Debtors’
Prisons are filled with stories of the exorbitant and extortionate
costs charged by attornies, and with the sufferings of the debtors in
consequence.

The honour in which the City was held was illustrated when the King
joined the Clothworkers’ Company, and when the Merchant Taylors, in
jealousy, showed him their roll of members containing seven kings, one
queen, seventeen princes and dukes, two duchesses, one archbishop,
thirty earls, five countesses, one viscount, fourteen bishops,
sixty-six barons, two ladies, seven abbots, seven priors, and an
immense number of knights and esquires. The King gave them his son
Henry as a member.

The New River was completed after eight years of work. The length of
the canal was 60 miles; it was crossed by 800 bridges, and five years
were spent in the construction; the people were slow in taking their
water from the new supply, probably because they detested changing
their ways. The City was at first supplied with water from the Walbrook
and the Fleet; there were also wells and springs on the rising ground
of the Strand; in Moorfields, at Shoreditch, and elsewhere there were
wells sunk within the City walls; and there were “bosses” or taps of
fresh water brought in from Tyburn. All this, however, was not enough;
the principal sources of supply, the Fleet and Walbrook, had long since
ceased to be of any use. Powers therefore were sought to bring more
water into the City, and were granted to bring water from Hampstead
and from the river Lea; these powers were not, however, used. Improved
works were set up at Tyburn; water mills were placed in the Thames, by
which water was forced up and conveyed as far as Leadenhall. Finally,
after a great deal of hesitation the City made use of these powers to
construct a canal from springs at Chadwell and Amwell in Herts, and
accepted the office of Hugh Middleton, a goldsmith, to execute the
work. Middleton would have failed, however, but for the help of James,
who agreed to pay half the cost of the work if Middleton gave him half
the property. This was done in an assignment of thirty-six “King’s
shares.” Charles parted with them for an annuity of £500. A few years
ago an undivided share sold for £94,900. Yet Middleton died in reduced
circumstances, unable to pay a loan which the City had advanced him on
the progress of his work.

The flight of the Earls of Tyrone and Tyrconnel in 1607 left without
an owner a large tract of land in the north of Ireland which was
confiscated to the Crown. It was proposed to colonise the district,
and a scheme was drawn up for the “Plantation of Ulster.” The King
proposed that the City should take part in this work; the citizens were
assured that their own City was dangerously overcrowded with workmen
and traders of all kinds, that the plantation would be an outlet
much wanted, that the country was well watered and fertile, good for
breeding cattle, well stocked with game and with fisheries; they were
even told to consider how great a work had been done by the people of
Bristol in settling Dublin. A fuller account of the Irish Estates will
be found later on (p. 206).

The conduct of a State Banquet at the Court of King James is minutely
related in the following account of the Banquet presented to the
Spanish Ambassador by the King.

[Illustration: KING JAMES I. ENTERTAINING THE SPANISH AMBASSADOR AT
WHITEHALL, 1623

From a contemporary print. E. Gardner’s Collection.]

  “The Audience Chamber was elegantly furnished, having a buffet of
  several stages, filled with various pieces of ancient and modern
  gilt plate of exquisite workmanship. A railing was placed on each
  side the room in order to prevent the crowd from approaching too
  near the table. At the right hand upon entering was another buffet,
  containing rich vessels of gold, agate, and other precious stones.
  The table might be about five yards in length, and more than one
  yard broad. The dishes were brought in by gentlemen and servants of
  the King, who were accompanied by the Lord Chamberlain, and before
  placing them on the table they made four or five obeisances. The
  Earls of Pembroke and Southampton officiated as gentlemen-ushers.
  Their Majesties, with the Prince Henry, entered after the Constable
  and the others, and placed themselves at their throne, and all
  stood in a line to hear the grace said; the Constable being at
  the King’s side, and the Count de Villamediana on the Queen’s.
  Their Majesties washed their hands in the same basin, the Lord
  Treasurer handing the towel to the King, and the High Admiral to
  the Queen. The Prince washed in another basin, in which water
  was also taken to the Constable, who was waited upon by the same
  gentlemen. They took their seats in the following manner: their
  Majesties sat at the head of the table, at a distance from each
  other, under the canopy of state, the Queen being on the right
  hand, on chairs of brocade with cushions; and at her side, a little
  apart, sat the Constable, on a tabouret of brocade with a high
  cushion of the same, and on the side of the King the Prince was
  seated in like manner. On the opposite side of the table and on the
  right sat Count Villamediana, and next to him the Senator Rovida
  opposite the Constable; and on the same side with the senator,
  nearly fronting the Prince, were seated the President Richardot
  and the Audiencier, a space in front being left vacant owing to
  the absence of the Count d’Arembergue, who was prevented by the
  gout from attending. The principal noblemen of the kingdom were
  likewise at the table, in particular the Duke of Lennox; the Earl
  of Arundel; the Earl of Suffolke, Lord Chamberlain; the Earl of
  Dorset, Lord Treasurer; the Earl of Nottingham, High Admiral; the
  Earls of Devonshire, of Southampton, and of Pembroke; the Earl of
  Northumberland; the Earl of Worcester, Master of the Horse; the
  Earls of Shrewsbury, of Sussex, of Derby, and of Essex, and the
  Lord Chancellor—all being Knights of the Garter; also Barons Cecil
  and Wotton and the Lord Kinross, a privy councillor; Sir Thomas
  Erskine, Captain of the Guard; Sir John Ramsay and James Lindsay,
  Scotchmen; and other barons and gentlemen of quality. There was
  plenty of instrumental music and the banquet was sumptuous and
  profuse. The first thing the King did was to send the Constable
  a melon and half-a-dozen oranges on a very green branch, telling
  him that they were the fruit of Spain transplanted into England;
  to which the latter, kissing his hand, replied that he valued the
  gift more as coming from his Majesty than as being the fruit of his
  own country; he then divided the melon with their Majesties, and
  Don Blasco de Aragon handed the plate to the Queen, who politely
  and graciously acknowledged the attention. Soon afterwards the
  King stood up, and with his head uncovered drank to the Constable
  the health of their Spanish Majesties, and may the peace be
  happy and perpetual. The Constable pledged him in like manner,
  and replied that he entertained the same hope and that from the
  peace the greatest advantages might result to both crowns and to
  Christendom. The toast was then drunk by the Count Villamediana
  and the others present, to the delight and applause of their
  Majesties. Immediately afterwards, the Constable, seeing that
  another opportunity might not be afforded him, rose and drank to
  the King the health of the Queen from the lid of a cup of agate of
  extraordinary beauty and richness, set with diamonds and rubies,
  praying his Majesty would condescend to drink the toast from the
  cup, which he did accordingly, and ordered it to be passed round
  to the Prince and the others; and the Constable directed that the
  cup should remain in his Majesty’s buffet. At this period the
  people shouted out, ‘Peace, peace, peace! God save the King! God
  save the King! God save the King!’ and a king at arms presented
  himself before the table, and after the drums, trumpets, and
  other instruments had sounded, with a loud voice said in English:
  ‘That the kingdom returned many thanks to his Majesty for having
  concluded with the King of Spain so advantageous a peace, and
  he prayed to God that it might endure for many ages, and his
  subjects hoped that his Majesty would endeavour with all his might
  to maintain it so that they might enjoy from it tranquillity
  and repose, and that security and advantage might result to all
  his people; and therefore they prayed him to allow the same to
  be published in the kingdoms and dominions of his Majesty.’ At
  length, after other healths and messages from the King and Queen,
  it was brought to a conclusion, having lasted about three hours.
  The cloth having been removed, every one immediately rose up; the
  table was placed upon the ground, and their Majesties standing
  upon it, proceeded to wash their hands, which is stated to be an
  ancient ceremony. The Constable invited Count Villamediana to wash
  in his basin, and the other Commissioners washed in others. Their
  Majesties then withdrew to their apartment, and the Constable and
  Count were conducted to a handsome gallery, adorned with various
  paintings, where they remained more than an hour. In the meantime
  dancing had begun in the said Audience Chamber, and the Constable
  and Count were informed in the name of their Majesties that they
  were then waiting for them to go and see it.

[Illustration: HENRY, PRINCE OF WALES (1594–1612)

From the painting by Paul von Somer.]

  After a little while the Prince Henry was commanded by his parents
  to dance a galliard, and they pointed out to him the lady who was
  to be his partner; and this he did with much sprightliness and
  modesty, cutting several capers in the course of the dance....
  The ball ended, and then all took their places at the windows of
  the room, which looked out upon a square where a platform was
  raised, and a vast crowd had assembled to see the King’s bears
  fight with greyhounds. This afforded great amusement. Presently a
  bull, tied to the end of a rope, was fiercely baited by dogs. After
  this certain tumblers came, who danced upon a rope and performed
  curious feats of agility and skill on horseback. With this ended
  the entertainment and the day, and their Majesties now retired,
  being accompanied by the Constable and the other noblemen to their
  apartment, before entering which, many compliments passed on both
  sides, and their Majesties and the Prince shook hands with the
  Constable and the Count; and the other Spanish cavaliers kissed
  hands and took their departure. The Constable and the others, upon
  quitting the ball-room, were accompanied by the Lord Chamberlain
  to the farthest room, and by the Earl of Devonshire and other
  gentlemen to their coaches, more than fifty halberdiers lighting
  them with torches until they reached home, where as many others
  were waiting their arrival. Being fatigued, the Constable and the
  Count supped that night in private, and the others at the ordinary
  table.”

The mind of the City in 1607 was greatly exercised with a question of
precedence. The question, which was submitted to the King, and by him
submitted to the Court Marshal, was as follows:—

  “Whether a Commoner dignified with knighthood, without any other
  advantage of honour by employment or otherwise, and using trade and
  keeping shop in the City, should take place of an Alderman Knight
  within the same City, contrary to this beautified order, of ancient
  time settled and confirmed, with such charters and grants from his
  Majesty; or whether any other Bachelor Knight shall take place of
  any Alderman within this City?”

The question was decided in favour of the precedency of the Aldermen.

In the year 1606 one is surprised to find an order for the cleansing of
the town ditch—the last of such orders. In 1598 Stow wrote that it was
stopped up and choked:—

“Now of late neglected and forced either to a very narrow, and the same
a filthy channel, or altogether stopped up for gardens planted, and
houses built thereon; even to the very wall, and in many places upon
both ditch and wall houses to be built; to what danger of the City, I
leave to wiser consideration, and can but wish that reformation might
be had.”

It had been cleansed in 1519, 1540, 1569, and 1595, but apparently
only in part. Thus in 1519 between Aldgate and the Tower postern, the
same part in 1540, the same part again in 1569, and the part between
Bishopsgate and the postern of Moorgate in 1595. I do not understand
the reason of these repeated cleansings of parts.

In 1614 Smithfield, which had now become the cattle-market of the City,
and was therefore a place of very great resort, continued to be without
pavement of any kind, so that during or after rainy weather it was
absolutely impassable for mud and mire. King James called the attention
of the Mayor to this scandal, and ordered that the place should be
paved. This was done. The paving was the old-fashioned cobble; it took
six months to lay down, and cost £1600.

At the same time the laying down of broad freestones instead of the old
cobbles was commenced. Those of the inhabitants who chose laid down the
stones before their own doors. We must understand, therefore, that all
the important streets at this time were paved with cobbles; that in a
few of the principal thoroughfares there was a pavement of flat stones,
but not uniform; and that there were many courts and alleys where there
was no kind of pavement at all. We may further understand that this was
the London of Hogarth as well as of James I.

On July 8, 1614, the Lord Mayor sent a communication to the Lord
Chamberlain detailing the steps he had taken in reforming disorderly
practices (_Remembrancia_, p. 358):—

  _Firstly._—He had freed the streets of a swarm of loose and idle
  vagrants, providing for the relief of such as were not able to get
  their living, and keeping them at work in Bridewell, not punishing
  any for begging, but setting them on work, which was worse than
  death to them.

  _Secondly._—He had informed himself, by means of spies, of many
  lewd houses, and had gone himself disguised to divers of them, and
  finding these nurseries of villany, had punished them according to
  their deserts, some by carting and whipping, and many by banishment.

  _Thirdly._—Finding the gaol pestered with prisoners, and their
  bane to take root and beginning at ale-houses, and much mischief
  to be there plotted, with great waste of corn in brewing heady
  strong beer, many consuming all their time and sucking that sweet
  poison, he had taken an exact survey of all victualling-houses and
  ale-houses, which were above a thousand, and above 300 barrels
  of strong beer in some houses, the whole quantity of beer in
  victualling-houses amounting to above 40,000 barrels; he had
  thought it high time to abridge their number and limit them by
  bonds as to the quantity of beer they should use, and as to what
  orders they should observe, whereby the price of corn and malt had
  greatly fallen.

  _Fourthly._—The Bakers and Brewers had been drawn within bounds, so
  that, if the course continued, men might have what they paid for,
  viz. weight and measure.

  He had also endeavoured to keep the Sabbath day holy, for which he
  had been much maligned.

  _Fifthly._—If what he had done were well taken, he would proceed
  further, viz. to deal with thieving brokers or broggers, who were
  the receivers of all stolen goods.

  And lastly, the inmates of infected houses would require before
  summer to be discharged of all superfluities for avoiding
  infection, etc.

[Illustration: A FACSIMILE OF THE ORDER FOR THE BURNING OF THE BOOK
OF SPORTS

E. Gardner’s Collection.]

{Transcription:
                    _Die Veneris 5^o. Maij. 1643._

  It is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
  That the Booke concerning the enjoyning and tollerating of Sports
  upon the Lords day, be forthwith Burned by the hand of the Common
  Hangman in _Cheape-side_, and other usuall places: And to this
  purpose, the Sheriffs of _London_ and _Middlesex_ respectively, are
  hereby required to be Assistant to the effectuall Execution of this
  Order, and see the said Books burnt accordingly. And all persons
  who have any of the said Books in their hands, are hereby required
  forthwith to deliver them to one of the Sheriffes of _London_, to
  be burnt according to this Order.

                                   _John Browne Cler. Parl._
                                   _Henry Elsynge Cler. P. D. Com._

                   *       *       *       *       *

  _The Sheriffes of_ London _and_ Middlesex _have assigned Wednesday
  next the 10^{th} of this instant May, at twelve of the clock, for
  the putting in execution of the foresaid_ Ordinance, _and therefore
  doe require all persons that have any of the Bookes therein
  mentioned, to bring them in by that time, that they may be burned
  accordingly_.

                                                   John Langham.
                                                   Thomas Andrewes.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                               _LONDON:_
        Printed for _Thomas Underhill_ in _Great Woodstreete_.
                            _May 9. 1643._}

Returning from Scotland in 1618 James observed that certain persons of
Lancashire, whom he called Puritans, and precise people, had interfered
by prohibiting such “lawful recreations and honest exercises upon
Sundays and other holidays after the afternoon sermon or service”
as the peasantry had been accustomed to indulge in; he therefore
issued a declaration setting forth that this prohibition “barreth the
common and meaner sort of people from using such exercises as may make
their bodies more able for war, when we or our successors shall have
occasion to use them; and in place thereof sets up filthy tiplings and
drunkenness, and breeds a number of idle and discontented speeches
in their ale-houses: for when shall the common people have leave to
exercise, if not upon the Sundays and holidays, seeing they must apply
their labour, and win their living, in all working days?”

The King therefore commanded that no recreations should be denied to
his subjects which did not militate against the laws and the canons
of the Church. “And as for our good people’s lawful recreation, our
pleasure likewise is that after the end of divine services our good
people may not be disturbed, letted, or discouraged from any lawful
recreation, such as dancing, either men or women, archery for men,
leaping, vaulting, or any other such harmless recreation: nor from
having of May games, Whitsun ales, and Morris dances, and the setting
up of May-poles, and other sports therewith used, as the same be had
in due and convenient time without impediment or neglect of divine
service; and that women shall have leave to carry rushes to the church
for the decorating of it, according to their old custom. But withall,
we do here account still as prohibited all unlawful games to be used
upon Sunday only, as bear and bull-baiting, interludes, and, at all
times in the meaner sort of people by law prohibited, bowling.”

The famous Book of Sports, which laid down rules as to games and
sports lawful to be played on the Sunday, was ordered to be read in
every parish church throughout the country. The reception of the
proclamation, especially in the City, seems to have surprised the
King’s advisers. Neither James nor his son could ever understand the
extent or the depth of the new ideas in religion. Sunday, in the eyes
of most people who thought about religion at all—that is, in the eyes
of all responsible persons in London, which was a hot-bed of religious
controversy—had become the Jewish Sabbath. Most of the City clergy
refused absolutely to read the Book of Sports in their churches,
choosing to be fined or suspended and imprisoned rather than obey.
These punishments they endured. But the feeling in the City ran very
high, insomuch that the Lord Mayor refused permission for the King’s
carriages to be drawn through the City on Sunday during Divine Service.
There was, naturally, great indignation at Court. The King made the
customary observation about two Kings in the country. However, he sent
his carriages back with a warrant to let them pass. This the Mayor
obeyed, saying that he had done his duty, but that what one in higher
authority commanded, he must obey. So no more was said, and the City,
in the matter of the Book of Sports, had peace.

The story of the settlement of Virginia is a pleasing episode of this
reign. It shows the City at its best, wise, patriotic, generous,
and far-seeing. Taking this history with that of the plantation of
Ulster, we have a proof that the City was at this time overcrowded and
congested. When the latter scheme was first set afoot the citizens were
reminded that the City was so crowded that one tradesman was hardly
able to live by another, and when the Virginian colony was mooted
it was proposed to relieve the streets by sending out all the idle
children.

[Illustration: THE DESTRUCTION OF CHEAPSIDE CROSS AND THE BURNING OF
THE BOOK OF SPORTS, MAY 1643]

{Transcription:
  _The 2 of May, 1643 y^e Crosse in Cheapeside was pulled downe, a
  Troope of Horse & 2 Companies of foote wayted to garde it & at y^e
  fall of y^e tope Crosse dromes beat trumpets blew & multitudes of
  Capes wayre throwne in y^e Ayre & a great Shoute of People with
  ioy, y^e 2 of May the Almanake sayeth, was y^e invention of the
  Crosse, & 6 day at night was the Leaden Popes burnt in the place
  where it stood with ringinge of Bells & a greate Acclamation & no
  hurt done in all these actions._

  _10 of May the Boocke of Sportes upon the Lords day was burnt by
  the Hangman in the place where the crosse stoode, & at Exchange_}

The Company for colonising Virginia was founded in 1609. The promoters
assured the Mayor, then Sir Humphry Wild, that if the surplus
population of London could be transferred to Virginia there would be
far less danger of pestilence and famine. By way of attracting people
willing to emigrate, meat, drink, and clothing, with a house, orchard,
and garden, and an allotment of land, were offered. Any alderman
subscribing £50 would be reckoned an original member of the Council.
“Bills of Association” were given to all who subscribed, entitling them
to a _pro rata_ share in the profits. Fifty-six of the Companies agreed
to take ventures in the plantations. On May 23, 1609, the Company
received a second charter, and in the same month the first fleet of
seven ships was dispatched. The ships took three months to get across;
yellow fever broke out among their crews and passengers, the number of
whom were sadly reduced when they landed.

In two years’ time the Company had got through all their money,
though they had raised £18,000 since their first fleet went out. They
obtained, however, a third charter, with the addition of the Bermudas,
and they held a public lottery. It is remarkable to find the City
Companies and the City churches, or vestries, taking shares in this
lottery.

Two years later a second lottery was set on foot. In 1618 it was
decided to take up vagrant boys and girls in the streets and to
transport them to Virginia. This was done. A beginning was made with
100, who were shipped across so successfully that the Corporation sent
over another hundred. The children cost £5 each, including their voyage
and their clothing. The Common Council paid for both shiploads by a
rate levied on the City.

Next, the King complained that whole companies of lazy rogues and
masterless men followed the Court. The Virginia Company laid hands
on all, put them into Bridewell, and as soon as possible packed them
off for the Plantation. But the infant colony suffered in 1622 from a
treacherous attack made upon the people by the Indians, in which 350
of the settlers perished. The Court of Common Council voted another
£500 for another shipload of boys and girls. The question of beggars,
vagrants, and disorderly persons was constantly before the authorities.
The difficulty has always been the same. If they are suppressed one
day, they gather again the next.

In the year 1614 the City began a very mean and unworthy practice;
that, namely, of electing to the office of Sheriff those who would
rather pay the fine than serve. In this year nearly a dozen were
elected, all of whom declined to serve.

In the same year the Mayor and Corporation received a reminder that
the City was expected to keep a force of militia always equipped and
drilled. They therefore resolved on raising a force of 6000 men; the
Aldermen were provided with precepts stating the number of men wanted
from each ward, with the kind of arms and armour which they were to
bring with them. A list of prices at which the arms could be procured
was appended to the precept:—

  “Jerome Heydon, described as ‘iremonger at the lower end of
  Cheapeside,’ was ready to sell corslets, comprising ‘brest, backe,
  gorgett, taces and headpiece,’ at 15s.; pikes with steel heads at
  2s. 6d.; swords, being Turkey blades, at 7s.; ‘bastard’ muskets at
  14s.; great muskets with rests, at 16s.; a headpiece, lined and
  stringed, at 2s. 6d., and a bandaleer for 1s. 6d. Henry White and
  Don Sany Southwell were prepared to do corslets 6d. cheaper, and
  the same with swords, but their swords are described as only ‘Irish
  hilts and belts to them.’ Their bastard muskets, ‘with mouldes,’
  could be had for 13s., or 1s. cheaper than those of Jerome Heydon.
  The Armourers’ Company were ready to supply corslets at 15s., but
  for the same ‘with pouldrons’ they asked 4s. more. The Cutlers’
  Company would furnish ‘a very good turky blade and good open hilts’
  for 6s., thus underselling the private firms.”

The interference of James with the Merchant Adventurers in 1615 is
difficult to understand. He suppressed the Company, withdrew all
licences for the exportation of undyed and undressed cloth, and formed
a new company. The Dutch threatened to set up looms for themselves and
to destroy the English trade in cloth, but the new company proved a
failure, and the old company was restored.

The charter granted by James in the sixth year of his reign confirmed
all the ancient rights, liberties, and immunities of the citizens, and
added to the bounds of the City and its jurisdiction, the precincts of
Duke’s Place, St. Bartholomew’s the Great and Less, Black and White
Friars, and Cold Harbour.

Yet the same anxiety which possessed the Government in the reign of
Elizabeth as to the increase of London was shown by that of James in
his very first year, when he issued a proclamation putting a stop to
the building of new houses in the suburbs. It was ordered that no one
should build on new foundations, and that all houses so built should
be pulled down. The frequency of these proclamations shows that the
Government was in earnest on the subject. No doubt the ordinance was
evaded because the suburbs were actually increasing, and that rapidly,
but a great many persons would be deterred by fear of breaking the law,
and would either remain in the City, which was greatly overcrowded, or
go across the river and occupy Southwark, which began to fill up fast,
along the causeway and embankment, and to grow also by putting out new
streets on either side of the former and along the road to Bermondsey.
The year after a third proclamation was issued to the same effect;
no one was to build on new foundations within two miles of the City.
The people paid no attention to this proclamation, and building went
on without molestation for some years, when the builders were called
upon either to buy their own houses at an extravagant price or to pull
them down. This mode of enforcing the law would not be approved at the
present day; in 1617 it put money into James’s pocket.

Six years later another proclamation was published to the same effect,
acknowledging the futility of the former law.

On a certain Sunday afternoon, the 26th of October 1623, occurred
a disaster, called the Fatal Vespers, which was long remembered as
a signal proof of Heaven’s wrath against those who followed Popish
worship. The French Ambassador at that time had a house in Blackfriars,
adjoining which there was a large upper chamber, sometimes used as
the Ambassador’s chapel, about 60 feet long and 20 feet broad. Roman
Catholics in London frequented the chapels at the various embassies.
But this was not the French Ambassador’s chapel, which was within his
house. Perhaps the occasion demanded a larger room.

On this afternoon about 300 persons were assembled to celebrate
evensong and to hear a sermon from a Jesuit named Father Drury, a
person held in great repute for his learning, his blameless life, and
laudable conversation. The congregation consisted of English, Scotch,
Irish, and Welsh. The sermon began between three and four in the
afternoon. The text was the parable of the king and the servant whom he
forgave.

In the midst of the sermon the beams and side timbers of the floor
suddenly gave way and fell with all the people upon the floor of the
room below. This in its turn being broken through, all fell upon the
lowest floor, where they lay piled together with the beams and broken
planks. The only persons who did not fall were some thirty sitting or
standing in a corner where the beams held fast. These people with their
knives cut a hole in the wall, and so got safely into the Ambassador’s
house.

Meanwhile people came running with spades and pickaxes to extricate the
sufferers from the ruins.

It took the whole of that day and night to bring out all the people.
Out of the 300 who were assembled in the evening some thirty we have
said did not fall with the rest. Ninety-five were found to be dead,
including the preacher, Father Drury, and a great many were maimed and
bruised.

The story of a tumult by the City ’prentices suggests the fourteenth
century. It began with one of them crying out when Gondomar, the
Spanish Ambassador, was being carried down Fleet Street in his chair,
“There goes the devil in a dung-cart.” Upon which one of the suite
retorted sharply. Then the apprentice knocked down the Spaniard. For
this offence he with his companions was ordered to be whipped through
the City. Thereupon the apprentices rose, 300 strong, and released
their companions. However, it could not be endured that an Ambassador
should be insulted, and the sentence was carried out. One of the
apprentices died, presumably from the severity of his punishment; the
others were released, and when it was known, later on, that the Spanish
match had fallen through, the Londoners expressed the liveliest joy,
bonfires were lit, bells rung, tables were spread in the streets, casks
were broached, and all because the Prince was coming home—without the
Infanta.

All that precedes concerning the reign of James I. touches the surface
of things. These events might have been observed by any casual
by-stander, and understood by him as possessing no significance as to
the mind of the people and the City.

We have now to consider the influence of James, not on the country
at large, where opinion was slow in coming to a head, so much as in
the City, where, with 100,000 gathered closely together, and that
within hearing of Whitehall, suspicion and jealousy, once awakened,
became rapidly opinion, and opinion became conviction, and the settled
conviction of the City, once known and formulated, proved the most
important weapon of all those forged by the pedantry and obstinacy
of James, and the equal obstinacy and wrongheadedness of Charles. In
other words, it is necessary in this place to show, if possible, that
in a closer sense than is usual the years 1603–1625 were a preparation
for the appeal to arms, by which the liberties of the country were
secured. I prepare, therefore, to pass in very brief review some of the
leading political events of the time, in order to show how the City was
affected by them.

To begin with, the City was fiercely Protestant. The Catholic reaction,
which had stayed the spread of Continental Protestantism, only made
England more doggedly Protestant. That a new life had been imparted
to the Catholic Church by the Jesuits and the new orders made the
Englishman only the more hostile to a church which threatened his
nationality, his liberties, everything that he held most sacred. Again,
to the Protestant spirit belonged the right of free thought and free
doctrine as against authority. Scholars and divines were satisfied
with the purely personal relations between God and man, which they
had substituted for the priest and the sacerdotal authority. What the
Protestant clergy wanted, what they asked of James in the Millenary
Petition was a reform in the ecclesiastical courts, the removal of
certain superstitious usages from the Prayer Book, the more rigorous
observance of Sunday, and the training of preachers. “Why,” asked
Bacon—he might have asked the same question to-day—“should the civil
state be purged and restored by good and wholesome laws made every
three years in Parliament assembled, devising remedies as fast as
time breedeth mischief, and contrariwise the ecclesiastical state
still continue upon the dregs of time, and receive no alteration these
forty-five years and more?”

However, James had not the least intention of making any change in the
ecclesiastical courts.

Moreover, he had already declared his views as to the rights of
the sovereign. “A king, he said, is not bound to frame his actions
according to law, but of his own free will, and for giving an example
to his people.” Convocation was quick to adopt this view and to
denounce as a fatal error the doctrine that all power is derived from
the people. Later on, the University of Oxford proclaimed the doctrine
of passive resistance. It is difficult to speak with moderation of
these two opinions, or to estimate how far they are responsible for the
bloodshed of the Civil War.

How James carried on his government for seven years without a
Parliament belongs to national history. We may, however, picture
the wrath and exasperation of the City at the encroachments of the
spiritual courts, the subserviency of the lawyers and judges, the
extortions, the sale of peerages, and the dismissal of the Chief
Justice. We can also imagine the whispers that went round concerning
the Court, its extravagance, the shameless promotion of favourites, the
scandals, the attempt to form a Spanish alliance.

We may sum up this ignoble reign, so far as concerns London, by saying
that the attitude of the City during the whole of it was one of
observation and endurance. We have seen something of what was observed.
There were, however, other things of which the City took silent note.
To begin with, James, while he proclaimed the Royal prerogative, threw
away the Royal dignity. He was extravagant and in foolish ways; he
loved favourites and they were unworthy; his son was the idol of the
people, but James affected no grief for him, nay, it was even whispered
that the young Prince was poisoned, and with the guilty knowledge
of his father; he hated Puritans and persecuted Catholics; he spent
most of his time in hunting; it was commonly reported that he drank
heavily; his servants were left without their wages; his purveyors
refused supplies until they were paid; he was always preaching the
Royal prerogative; he was anxious to enter upon a marriage with Spain,
the arch-enemy of the Protestant religion; he tried to bully the House
of Commons, but got nothing from them; he granted monopolies, a thing
abhorrent to the commercial mind. All these things London observed and
marked, and they bore their fruit in the reign of James’s son, and
those of his two grandsons. But as yet resistance—armed resistance—was
not even thought of. Plots and conspiracies there were, but of small
account. Of armed resistance on behalf of the liberties of the country
as yet there was no idea.




                              CHAPTER II

                               CHARLES I


The history of Charles shows, if we consider nothing more than his
dealings with the City of London, a wrongheadedness which is most
amazing. It is true that two at least of the Tudor sovereigns had ruled
the City with a strong hand, but they knew how to make themselves loved
as well as feared, and they knew, further, how timely concessions in
small things may overcome resistance in great things. Moreover, we have
seen how James had endeavoured to make himself an absolute monarch,
and the results which followed. As the event proved, the side taken by
London in this reign was once more the winning side; as it was with
Richard the Second and Henry the Sixth, so it was with Charles the
First.

[Illustration: CHARLES I. (1600–1649)

From the replica of the portrait by Van Dyck painted by Sir Peter Lely.]

[Illustration: CHEAPSIDE—QUEEN HENRIETTA MARIA’S ENTRY INTO LONDON

From a contemporary print.]

I have attempted to indicate something of the effect produced upon
the City by the reign of James I. I have now to show the fruits of
that reign, followed by another even more obstinately arbitrary; even
blinder to the threatening wave that was rising and swelling before
the King’s feet, so that it was impossible, one would have thought,
not to see it and to understand it. The unbroken contumacy of the
House of Commons, whenever it had a chance of speaking, was not that
a sign which might have been read by the King and his Ministers? The
sullen attitude of the City—was not that a sign? Charles, however,
saw nothing, or, if he saw, then he thought the opposition feeble
compared with the forces at his own disposal. Nothing, however, seems
to have been further from his thoughts than armed resistance. Let us
remember, however, that at the outset Charles had to face an angry
and discontented City; angry on account of the ecclesiastical courts
and the impossibility of redress; discontented on account of the late
King’s deliberate trampling upon all its liberties.

On the 28th of April, Charles was proclaimed King at Ludgate Hill,
himself being present. On the 1st of May he was married by proxy
in Paris to Henrietta Maria. The new Queen came over at once, and
received a kindly welcome from the citizens. The public entry, which
was arranged for June 18, was postponed on account of another outbreak
of plague. The number of deaths from this visitation is returned at
35,417, about one-third of the whole population. As in 1603, and
later on in 1665, the richer sort hurried out of the town on the
first outbreak, leaving behind them the population which cannot leave
the place of work, namely, the apprentices, craftsmen, servants, and
porters. The rich carried away what they could, but they were refused
entrance into the villages, even the barns being closed to them. Many
of them died on the highway, their pockets stuffed with money.

In the midst of this terrible time Charles called upon the City to
raise and equip 1000 men for the new expedition. This was done, and
the men were raised somehow, and marched down to Plymouth, where they
awaited the arrival of the Fleet with no pay and no provisions. Finally
the Fleet arrived, and they went on board, bound for Cadiz, there to
experience failure.

The Parliament of 1626 refused to grant supplies until grievances had
been considered. Charles therefore dissolved it. This was like his
father. He would get on without the Parliament. He began by calling
upon the City to lend him £100,000. The City refused, they had no
money, they were just recovering from the Plague; they lent, however,
£20,000 on good security. Next came a demand for 4000 men and 20 ships,
the first for the defence of Sheppey, and the second in order to carry
the war into the enemy’s country. To the first the City replied that
the order came from some of the lords and not from the King, and that
by charter their soldiers were for the defence of the City and must
not go farther than the Mayor himself may go. As we have seen in the
past, this right was always put forward when the City did not want to
obey the King, and always neglected when the City was willing that
its troops should go anywhere, as, for instance, in the deposition of
Richard the Second, in the siege of Winchester under Stephen, and in
the defence of the country against the Spanish Armada.

As for the ships, the Mayor was instructed to reply that the City
was in a most impoverished condition, that they could not get the
ships ready in the time, and that the merchants would far rather have
letters of mark and go out privateering. However, the City gave way.
It is an indication of the poverty of the City at this time that the
small sum of £18,000 wanted for fitting out the ships could not be
raised. Many of the people steadfastly refused to pay their rate; the
constables refused to distrain; the people helped one another when the
constables tried to do their duty. Meantime the streets of the City
were thronged with sailors clamouring for their pay; they mobbed the
Duke of Buckingham, who put them off with promises. Charles had no
money to give them. He endeavoured to get supplies by the “Forced Loan”
of 1626. The City was left for a time, but when in 1627 war broke out
between France and England it became necessary to press for the loan.
Some persons refused to give any money and were committed to prison;
the judges declared the loan illegal. The City, however, after long
discussions, resolved on lending the King another sum of £120,000,
provided it was amply secured.

The following is part of the assessment, showing the demands divided
among the leading companies:—

  Merchant Taylors    £6300
  Grocers             £6000
  Haberdashers        £4300
  Drapers             £4608
  Vintners            £3120
  Goldsmiths          £4380
  Mercers             £3720
  Fishmongers         £3390
  Clothworkers        £3390

The masters and wardens of the plumbers, saddlers, founders, joiners,
and glaziers were sent to prison for neglecting to collect the
company’s quota.

The unpopularity of Buckingham, upon whom was laid the odium of
failure, is shown in the very strange story of the murder of Dr. Lambe.
Lambe was an astrologer and a creature of Buckingham’s. The account of
his death is told in three ways. First, that of Dr. Reginald Sharpe
(_London and the Kingdom_, ii. p. 105). He says that Lambe was set
upon by some of the people in the City on his way home after supper,
that they did him nearly to death, and that no one would receive the
wounded man, who was taken to the compter, and died the next day. The
other accounts are more elaborate and more unreal. They are as follows:—

1. He was insulted by a few boys, who were joined by the rabble, so
that he took refuge in a tavern in the Old Jewry. The vintner, for his
own safety, turned him out, whereupon the mob beat him to death before
the Mayor’s guard could reach the spot.

[Illustration: HENRIETTA MARIA (1609–1669)

From an engraving by Voerts, after Van Dyck.]

2. He was in Cheapside, where he was insulted by the boys, who were
joined by the mob; he ran into a house of Wood Street, where the people
broke all the windows. He was forced to leave his refuge, and was then
seized by the mob, who dragged him along, striking and kicking him. The
account goes on to say that the news of the tumult reaching the King,
he rode, accompanied by a small guard, into the City, and found in St.
Paul’s Churchyard the mob, still beating and kicking the man; that he
addressed the mob and bade them desist; that they replied that they had
already judged him; and in fact they had so dislocated his limbs that
he was dead. Charles, having so small a guard, was obliged to retire.

The second of these two accounts is clearly false, because Wood Street
is only a few minutes’ walk from St. Paul’s Churchyard; the noise of
a City disturbance would not reach Whitehall; when the news of it did
reach Whitehall, the thing must have been over, unless the kicking and
striking lasted for an hour; it would take quite an hour for the riot
to be reported to the King, and for him to get ready his escort and to
ride to St. Paul’s.

In any case there is no doubt that the man Lambe was murdered by the
London mob; also that the King was greatly incensed at the matter, for
he wrote an angry letter to the Mayor calling for the punishment of the
murderers. The Mayor replied that he could not find any; the City was
therefore fined £6000, which, on their arresting a few men, was reduced
to 1500 marks or £1000. It has been suggested that the money was all
that Charles wanted. If so, why did he reduce the fine? It is much more
probable that he was personally concerned at the murder.

There are many indications that the people were getting beyond the
control of the Mayor and Aldermen. The murder of Lambe was only one of
the many riotous affairs which occurred during this reign. In 1630 the
Sheriff’s officers having arrested a man in Fleet Street, the populace
rose and attempted a rescue. The Sheriff’s officers were supported
by watchmen, constables, and some of the citizens who joined them; a
fight ensued, in which many were killed and wounded. The Mayor, with a
company of the trained bands, arrived upon the scene and stopped the
battle. Several ringleaders were arrested, and one, Henry Stamford by
name, was executed.

Again, in 1640, the City being greatly enraged against the Archbishop
of Canterbury, a body of five hundred ’prentices gathered together by
night and ran to Lambeth, intending to sack and destroy the Palace;
the Archbishop, however, had got wind of their design, and was strong
enough to beat them off. The ’prentices also broke up the sittings of
the High Commissioner of St. Paul’s.

Another pestilence visited the City in 1629, remaining till 1631.
It was followed, as usual, by distress and scarcity of provisions.
Doggerel rhymes (_Sharpe_, ii. 109) appeared showing the temper of the
people:—

    “The corne is so dear,
     I doubt many will starve this year;
     If you see not to this
     Some of you will speed amiss.
     Our souls they are dear,
     For our bodies have some care.
     Before we arise
     Less will suffice.”

One of the advantages of keeping all the shops of one trade in the same
quarter is illustrated by the story of the Queen’s loss by robbery. It
was in the year 1631 that a part of her plate and jewels was stolen.
The purchasers of the stolen property must have been the goldsmiths,
and unless the stolen plate had been sent abroad, it might be recovered
by finding to what goldsmith it had been offered on purchase. Until the
beginning of the seventeenth century all the goldsmiths lived together
in Cheapside. As early as 1623 it was observed that many of them were
leaving their old quarters and setting up shops elsewhere. They were
ordered to go back to their old quarters, but, as generally happened
with such orders, there were no means of enforcing them, and the
goldsmiths continued to scatter themselves about the town. Then came
the Queen’s loss, and it was found that the order had been entirely
neglected. The Lords in Council, therefore, renewed the order on the
ground that by leaving Cheapside and setting up their shops in other
places, they offered facilities for “passing away of stolen plate.”
This order of Council was issued in 1635. As very little attention
was paid to the order, which was certainly vexatious, it was renewed
on May 24, 1637, and was followed by an order of the Court of Star
Chamber that if any other tradesmen besides goldsmiths should keep shop
in Cheapside or Lombard Street, the Alderman should be imprisoned for
permitting it. As little attention was paid to this order, a fourth,
to the same effect, was issued in January 1638. In the last the names
of some offenders were given; there were two stationers, a milliner, a
bandseller, a drugster, a cook, and a girdler. This interference with
the conduct of trade was part of a general and systematic attempt to
make the King master in everything. He could not possibly have made
a greater mistake than to interfere with the trading interests or to
meddle with the way in which a money-making community conducted its
affairs. The goldsmiths who had left Cheapside had done so in their own
interests; by scattering, each shop formed its own circle; to give up
that circle would be to give up the shopkeeper’s livelihood; they had
found out by this time that in a great city of 150,000 people, trade is
more successful when the shops of the same kind are scattered. Imagine
the wrath of Cheapside at the present day if all the shops except those
of one trade were ordered to depart!

The business of the ship money is by some historians considered
the greatest of all the King’s mistakes; but that of the Cheapside
tradesmen touched a lower level, and therefore a wider area. To bleed
the rich merchants was one thing, to deprive an honest tradesman of his
shop was more serious, because of tradesmen there were more than of
merchants. A charter confirming the City liberties produced no change
in the King’s policy. It was signed while the disputes concerning ship
money, Irish Estates, and interference with trade were at their height,
and it cost the City £12,000.

When we read of ships being fitted out by London, of the fleet equipped
by Sir John Philpott, of the solid support given to the fleet which
engaged the Spanish Armada, and of other occasions, it is difficult
to understand the objections of London to raise the ship money, save
on the supposition that they now perceived that the King meant to go
as far as he could in the way of despotic power, and that it behoved
them to make a stand and to fight every inch of ground. This they
prepared to do. First they set their law officers to hunt up charters
and Acts of Parliament. The case complete, they presented a petition
to the King, stating that by certain Acts recited the City was exempt
from such obligations. However, the City got nothing by its petition
except a peremptory order to raise the £30,000 wanted, and to raise it
at once. The City gave way and proceeded to obey and to fit out seven
ships.

The impost of ship money, which ultimately caused Charles I. so
much trouble, was suggested to him in 1631 by Sir William Noye,
Attorney-General, who had found among the records in the Tower, not
only writs compelling the ports on certain occasions to provide ships
for the use of the King, but others obliging their neighbours of the
maritime counties to contribute to the expense. Writs were issued to
London and the different ports, October 20, 1634, ordering them to
supply a certain number of ships of a specified tonnage, sufficiently
armed and manned, to rendezvous at Portsmouth on the 1st of March 1635.
The writ is set out in Howell’s _State Trials_, vol. iii. pp. 830–832,
and also the proceedings of the Common Council, and their petition to
the King against it. By this contrivance the King obtained a supply of
£218,500, which he devoted to providing a fleet. Twelve of the judges
decided that the King had the right to make the levy. In the speech of
Lord Keeper Coventry to the judges assembled in the Star Chamber on
the 14th of February 1636 he stated that, “In the first year, when the
writs were directed to the ports and the maritime places, they received
little or no opposition; but in the second year, when they went
generally throughout the kingdom, although by some well obeyed, have
been refused by some, not only in some inland counties, but in some of
the maritime places.”

Charles then called upon the whole nation to provide ship money.
London was ordered to equip two more ships of 800 tons apiece. One,
Robert Chambers by name, brought the question of the King’s right into
the Court of the King’s Bench. Mr. Justice Berkeley, with amazing
servility, refused to allow the case to be argued, because, he said,
“there is a rule of law, and another of government,” thus actually
separating the law and government. It was by this time fully evident
that the King and Council were resolved upon the humbling of the
City. If there was any doubt left in men’s minds, that doubt was
surely dispelled by the action of the Star Chamber concerning the
Irish Estates. The Star Chamber, after hearing a suit against the
City charging them with mal-administration of their Irish property,
condemned the City to forfeiture of all their lands in Ireland—lands
which, as we have seen, the City had been forced to take up by James
the First, and on which they had spent very large sums of money. In
addition to losing their estates the citizens were fined £70,000. As
for the fine, it was easier to inflict it than to levy it. The City
let the Irish Estates go for the present, and paid the sum of £12,000
in full discharge of the fine. But the thing remained in their minds,
and one of the first acts of Parliament, when it was called, was to
reconsider the whole question (see p. 209).

[Illustration: GEORGE VILLIERS, FIRST DUKE (SECOND CREATION) OF
BUCKINGHAM (1592–1628)

From the portrait by Gerard Honthorst.]

I purpose in this place to interrupt the direct course of events in
order to show, by reference to certain political events of the time,
the mind of London.

In 1626 occurred the famous impeachment of the Duke of Buckingham by
Sir John Eliot, when the Commons pronounced their first refusal to
grant subsidies till grievances had been redressed. Eliot was arrested
and confined to the Tower; after ten days he was released, but the
Parliament was dissolved. The King appealed to the country to grant as
a free gift what the Commons had refused.

The answer to this appeal should have left no doubt in the minds of
the King’s friends that the words of Sir John Eliot stated the mind
of the whole country. As regards London and Westminster they replied
to those who would collect the subsidy with cries of “A Parliament! A
Parliament!”

Charles then tried the expedient of a forced loan with equal want of
success. It was found impossible to collect it.

In 1628 a new Parliament was called. In this House the Petition of
Right was drawn up, in which, among other things, it was claimed that
no man should be compelled to pay any kind of tax without the consent
of Parliament.

Charles gave way, secretly, after his manner, reserving certain rights
of his own, as that of imprisonment without appeal. The City knew
nothing of this duplicity; bells were rung; bonfires lighted; it was
assumed that the King had honestly given way, and the House granted a
subsidy. Then came the news of Buckingham’s murder.

There were two of Charles’s friends, and only two, for whom the City
afterwards entertained a hatred equal to that they felt for Buckingham.
But at that moment there was no one whose death was so ardently
desired. When the news was brought to London, grave citizens drank the
health of Felton. When the murderer was brought to London, the crowd
followed praying that the Lord would comfort him. Such was the mind
of the City towards the man whom Eliot had impeached; they received
the news of his murder with savage exultation. Then Charles made Laud
Bishop of London—the third of the three men whose death a few years
later the City welcomed with shouts of joy. It was not enough to
trample on the liberties of the people, he must now proceed to deprive
them of their religion. The memorable sitting in the House when the
Speaker was held in his chair while the Commons passed resolution after
resolution against innovations in religion and the illegal levy of
taxes, belongs to national history. It was with passionate excitement,
hardly restrained from tumult, that the news of this sitting and these
resolutions was received in the City. There were as yet no newspapers
to furnish day by day a report of the proceedings in the House, but
the tidings of each protest of the Commons and each arbitrary measure
of the King flew through the streets of the City as quickly as if by
means of the daily paper, so that every house was filled with the angry
murmurs of the citizens, and men in the streets and on ’Change looked
at each other and asked what would happen next.

Yet no word of armed resistance. The old time when one King could be
put down and another set up in his place was forgotten. Rebellion was
not yet even thought of. The Parliament was dissolved.

Laud, free to do what he pleased, proceeded whither his pleasure
led him. What he did is national history. The people of London, of
whom nine-tenths were Puritans (see p. 137), or, at least, strong
Protestants, saw with rage the severance of the ties connecting the
Church of England with the foreign Protestant churches; they saw the
forcible introduction of rites and ceremonies offensive to Puritan
feeling; the expulsion of Puritan clergy; the suppression of Puritan
lectures; the prohibition of the Geneva Bible, loved by all the people;
the desecration, as they thought, of their so-called Sabbath; the
restoration of ritualism; the return, as they believed, to Rome.

There seemed no hope of redress. The High Church party were in power;
the return to Rome seemed certain.

It was at this time (1629–1640) that the first great emigration to
America took place. It was an emigration of men and women of every
station and every trade; there were men of family and property among
them; there were also husbandmen and humble craftsmen; 1700 emigrants
went out in one year, 1630; in eleven years (1629–1640) 20,000 went
away. It seems as if the magnitude of the emigration should have
caused uneasiness, but probably the exodus of 2000 people a year, many
of whom went abroad to better themselves without regard to religion,
was considered to be useful to the plantations, and, so far as they
departed for the sake of religion, in no way prejudicial to the State.

The lists published in _The Original Emigrants to America_ show that
from the Port of London—the only port we need mention here—in the
year 1635 there were embarked and were transported—not in a criminal
sense—no fewer than 4890 emigrants, a fourth part of the whole number
mentioned above. There must have been some special reason for the
departure of so many in one year. We may find it, perhaps, in the
tyrannical and oppressive proceedings of Laud. He had deprived the
French and Flemish refugees of their right to worship after their
own manner, and thousands emigrated in consequence; he had assumed a
censorship of the Press which forbade such books as Foxe’s _Book of
Martyrs_; he restored the “wakes” or dedication feasts, the church
ales, the Sunday sports, the surplice, kneeling at the Communion; he
insisted on uniformity of worship; these are sufficient causes for
the great emigration of 1635. The book in which I find the names of
the emigrants gives them in separate lists according to the ships in
which they sailed; in most cases it gives their ages, in a few cases
their occupation and station—unfortunately in very few cases. Again, in
some cases the list gives the name of the parish where the statutory
declaration was made, viz. the oaths of allegiance, that of conformity
to the Church of England, and the assurance that the emigrant was not
a “subsidy man”—that is to say, a person owing money to the State on
account of subsidy due. One need not attach much importance to this
declaration, as yet no one had begun to dispute the duty of allegiance;
the Church of England included the Puritans, and as regards the
subsidy, those who were of humble rank owed nothing; those of the
better sort may very well have protested that they owed nothing—as by a
strictly legal view they did not.

It is a great pity that the names of the places from which the
emigrants came are not always indicated. We cannot, for instance,
learn how far this movement affected London. Certain City parishes
are given in which the emigrants made the statutory declaration,
but in the majority of cases the parishes are not indicated. I have
compiled a table, manifestly very incomplete, of those parishes which
are mentioned. It is quite evident that many of the lists belong to
London, though the fact is not stated. Thus there seems no reason why
St. Katherine’s—is it St. Katherine Cree or St. Katherine Coleman, or
St. Katherine’s by the Tower?—should have sent out 157 emigrants; St.
Mildred’s, Bread Street, 27; and other London parishes two or three
only.

  St. Andrew, 1
  St. Alphege, 4
  All Hallows, Staining, 6
  St. Botolph, Billingsgate, 1
  St. Mildred, Bread Street, 27
  St. Katherine’s, 157
  St. Giles, Cripplegate, 6
  Minories, 4
  Stepney, 33
  Tower Precinct, 2
  St. Saviour, Southwark, 3
  St. Olave, Southwark, 5
  “Westminster,” 3
  “Wapping,” 6
  “Lombard Street,” 8
  “Cheapside,” 3
  “Fenchurch,” 1

The greatest contributor, however, to the 5000 was Gravesend, from
which place 1875 persons took the oaths and were sent on to the Port of
London to be shipped.

The sight of these crowds flocking to the Port of London to embark
on the ships bound for America; the provisioning of the ships for
the voyage; the talk about the places whither these persons were to
be carried; the reasons why they went; the escape for some from the
Laudian persecution; the hope, for others, of a new country where the
divine right of Kings would not be a subject of discussion; the grave
and serious divines who went on board these ships; the gentlemen who
joined them; the humble craftsmen who went with them, the Geneva Bible
in hand; can we doubt that these sights sank deep into the hearts of
the people? Can we doubt that the example, the prayers, the touching
farewells of these emigrants were sowing seeds which should produce
fruit eventful and terrible? “Our hearts,” said Winthrop, “shall be
fountains of tears for your everlasting welfare when we shall be in our
poor cottages in the wilderness.”

Doubt not that the people of London knew very well what a wilderness
this New England was; how hard and barren was its coast; how cruel was
its winter; how deadly and implacable were the Indians; they had heard
of seasons when the shell-fish of the sea-shore were the food of the
emigrants, when in the evening they knew not where they would find
their food in the morning, and when they assembled to worship under
escort and with armed sentinels.

We must not be led away to believe that after the first rush, when
divines, scholars, country gentlemen, and lawyers joined the list of
emigrants, the same class was continued. The lists before us point
rather in the other direction, as if in 1635, five years after the
first movement began, by far the larger number were craftsmen and
rustics. The age of the emigrants points to this conclusion. I have
taken a few consecutive pages at random. I find that out of 409 names
there were 106 under twenty; of these many were children and boys,
but the majority were eighteen and nineteen years old; 259 were men
and women—the men far outnumbering the women—in the full vigour of
early manhood, namely, over twenty and under thirty. There were
only thirty-four over forty and under fifty, and ten only of fifty
and upwards. In other words, I conclude from these lists that while
religion may have had a good deal to do with the emigration of this
year, a very large part of the attraction was the thought of adventure,
change, and better meat, which has always made the Englishman restless
and enterprising.

Where did the emigrants go? There were six places open to the emigrant
of the seventeenth century. And he went to them in the following
proportion during the year 1635:—

  New England           69 ships
  Virginia              21   „
  Barbadoes             10   „
  St. Christopher’s      6   „
  Providence             2   „
  Bermudas               2   „

Let us return to the constitutional part of the history.

Charles called no Parliament for eleven years. During that time, as
he could get no subsidies, he was compelled to practise every kind
of extortion; he enforced the old obligation to take the honour of
knighthood; he imposed fines for encroachments, for defective title
deeds, for recusancy.

Where he touched the City was, first, in reviving the old laws against
building in the suburbs, and in fining those living in houses built
twenty years before in assurance that the law was a dead letter; next,
in the levy of illegal and extortionate customs duties, which were
resisted by the City merchants, but at their peril. One of them said
that it was better to be a merchant in Turkey than in London; for
this he was sent to the Tower and fined £2000: thirdly, by the system
of monopolies, against which the City had protested under Elizabeth.
Everything became the subject of a monopoly. As was said afterwards in
the Long Parliament, “They sup in our cup; they dip in our dish; they
sit by our fire; we find them in the dye-fat, the wash bowls, and the
powdering tub. They have marked and sealed us from head to foot.”

All these grievances continued to roll up like a snowball, as silently
and as rapidly; yet it was an invisible snowball. Outwardly the King
and his friends were deceived by the general tranquillity; there was
offered very little resistance; there were manifested few open signs
of discontent; a general prosperity prevailed; trade was better than
it had been for many years; the English flag was flying over new seas
and in ports hitherto unknown; agriculture was advancing; the country
gentry were growing more easy in their means; every one seemed quiet.
In fact it was felt by the better class that there was no hurry. Sooner
or later there must be a Parliament; sooner or later the makeshifts of
the King would come to an end; there was no hurry. And the bill kept
rolling up. But the King, and Laud, and the Court party were deceived.
They mistook the quiet of the people, and especially of the City, for
submission and subjection; they thought that the spirit of resistance
was quelled.

Perhaps enough has been said to show the temper of the City. One or two
notes more.

We find a London clergyman calling on all Christians to “resist the
Bishops as robbers of souls, limbs of the Beast, and fathers of
Antichrist.” One pays very little heed to ecclesiastical censure, which
is generally cursing, at any time, but the vehemence of this language
seems worthy of remark.

When Prynne was carried from Palace Yard after the sentence which
deprived him of his ears, he was escorted by a hundred thousand
Londoners with prayers and cries of encouragement and of comfort.

In 1638 Hampden’s judges laid down the principle that “no statute
prohibiting arbitrary taxation could be pleaded against the King’s
will.” To this monstrous doctrine the City said nothing, the people
said nothing; they waited; sooner or later there must be a Parliament.

Next year began the Scotch troubles, the beginning of the end for
Charles.

In 1640 the King found himself compelled to call a Parliament; he must
have money.

This was the Short Parliament. I am quite sure that the news of the
summons was received on ’Change and wherever the merchants and citizens
of London met together with the quiet laughter of those who saw that
the day of redemption was drawing nigh. At last after eleven years
the Parliament was called together. Would the members prove staunch?
No fear of that. The City knew—no other institution or place knew so
well—the feeling of the country. The City always knew the feeling of
the country; there were a thousand correspondents between the City and
the country; the merchants had no doubt that the country was sound.
Laud’s clergy marked the change in the defiant air of the City, in the
exulting looks of the people; there were changes close at hand.

The House did prove staunch. Once more the Commons refused a subsidy
till grievances were redressed, and until security was obtained for
religion, for property, and for the liberties of the country. The
House was dissolved. Then the City laughed again and its people rubbed
their hands. For the King must have money, and without a Parliament he
could not get money. The Scotch business went on, and the snowball of
discontent and of grievances was now visible even to Charles the Blind.

Then began an interesting and an exciting time. The King tried to
persuade the City to lend him £100,000. The City steadfastly refused.
The Mayor and Aldermen were summoned to Whitehall; the King addressed
them; they were ordered to make out lists of the wealthier citizens;
they were dismissed, but were summoned again, and told that if they
did not pay £100,000 they would have to pay £200,000; and that if
they still refused that they would have to pay £300,000. They were
again dismissed, and told to prepare the list of rich citizens by the
following Sunday.

[Illustration: KING CHARLES I. THROWN OVERBOARD

From a satirical print in the British Museum.]

By this time the temper of London was roused. The Mayor and Aldermen
came on the following Sunday, but without that list. Instead
they brought a petition asking for redress. Some of them refused
absolutely to make out such a list, and were committed to prison,
viz. Sir Nicholas Rainton to the Marshalsea, Alderman Somers to the
Fleet, Alderman Atkins to the King’s Bench, and Alderman Gayre to
the Gatehouse. It was on Sunday, the 10th of May, that the Aldermen
went to prison. The reply of the City was a tumult, in which the
Archbishop’s Palace at Lambeth was attacked and the Archbishop’s life
was threatened. A royal warrant was issued commanding the Lord Mayor to
raise as many men as might be needed for the suppression of riots. At
the same time it was thought best to let the Aldermen go.

In June the Mayor was again summoned to show cause why the ship money
was not collected. He replied, plainly, that no one would pay it. Here
we see the secret of the City’s strength; the people only had to sit
down; they could not be forced to pay, either by the King, who had
no force at his disposal, or by the Aldermen, who had no police. The
people sat down and refused to pay. There were threats of debasing
the coinage unless the City yielded; the answer was that the Common
Council had no power to dispose of the citizens’ money. Charles
then endeavoured to raise £120,000 from the livery companies; they
replied—it was impossible to let go so fine an opportunity—that their
“stocks” had all been consumed in the Irish Estates—confiscated by the
King.

On the 3rd of November 1640 Charles, evidently suffering under great
depression of spirits, opened the Long Parliament.

Between the dissolution of the Short Parliament and the assembling of
the Long the City petitioned the King to call a Parliament for the
redress of grievances. Laud and the Privy Council tried to frighten the
City against signing it, but in vain. It was signed by 10,000 citizens.
Maitland gives it in full:—

  “MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN—

  Being moved with the Duty and Obedience, which by the Laws your
  Petitioners owe unto your sacred Majesty, they humbly present unto
  your princely and pious Wisdom the several pressing Grievances
  following, viz.—

  1. The pressing and unusual Impositions upon Merchandize,
  importing and exporting, and the urging and levying of Ship-Money,
  notwithstanding both which, Merchants’ Ships and Goods have been
  taken and destroyed both by Turkish and other Pirates.

  2. The Multitude of Monopolies, Patents, and Warrants, whereby
  Trade in the City, and other Parts of the Kingdom is much decayed.

  3. The sundry Innovations in Matters of Religion.

  4. The Oath and Canons lately enjoined by the late Convocation,
  whereby your Petitioners are in Danger to be deprived of their
  Ministers.

  5. The Great Concourse of Papists, and their Inhabitations
  in London, and the Suburbs, whereby they have more Means and
  Opportunity of plotting and executing their designs against the
  Religion established.

  6. The seldom Calling, and sudden Dissolutions of Parliaments,
  without the redress of your Subjects’ Grievances.

  7. The Imprisonment of divers Citizens for Non-payment of
  Ship-Money, and Impositions; and the prosecution of many others in
  the Star-Chamber, for not conforming themselves to Committees in
  Patents of Monopolies, whereby Trade is restrained.

  8. The great Danger your sacred Person is exposed unto in
  the present War, and the various fears that seized upon your
  Petitioners and their Families by reason thereof; which Grievances
  and Fears have occasioned so great a stop and distraction in Trade,
  that your Petitioners can neither buy, sell, receive, or pay as
  formerly, and tends to the utter Ruin of the Inhabitants of this
  City, the Decay of Navigation, and Clothing, and the Manufactures
  of this Kingdom.

[Illustration: From a contemporary print in the British Museum.]

{Transcription:
  Englands Miraculous Preservation Emblematically Described, Erected
               for a perpetuall _MONUMENT_ to Posterity.

  _Though Englands Ark have furios storms indurd By Plotts of foes
  and power of the sword Yet to this day by Gods almighty hand The
  Ark’s preservd and almost safe at land_}

  Your humble Petitioners conceiving that the said Grievances are
  contrary to the Laws of this Kingdom, and finding by Experience
  that they are not redressed by the ordinary Course of Justice, do
  therefore most humbly beseech your most sacred Majesty to cause a
  Parliament to be summoned with all convenient Speed, whereby they
  may be relieved in the Premises.

  And your Petitioners and loyal Subjects shall ever pray, etc.”

The fanatical temper of the people as regards the Catholics was shown
in their attack upon the Spanish Ambassador’s house in Bishopsgate
Street:—

  “Upon the twenty-ninth of April the first tumultuous disorder (of
  these Times) happened in London, when a great number of Apprentices
  and others beset the Spanish Ambassador’s house in Bishopsgate
  Street, threatening to pull it down, and to kill the Ambassador,
  for permitting English papists to frequent his Chapel. For the
  appeasing of this Commotion, the Lord-Mayor immediately repaired
  to the Ambassador’s, where with much difficulty he prevailed
  upon the Populace to disperse and return home. His Lordship had
  no sooner allayed the fury of the Multitude, than he entered the
  Ambassador’s House, and, being met by that Minister, was desired
  to drop the point of the City Sword that was carried before him,
  acquainting him, That he was then in a Place where the King of
  Spain, his Master, had Jurisdiction; which the Mayor complying
  with, the Ambassador told him that he had never seen so barbarous
  an attempt; and desired to know whether this could justly be called
  a civilized Nation, where the Laws of Nations and Hospitality were
  so horribly violated? The Mayor replied, That the Rioters were the
  very Refuse of the People, therefore entreated his Excellency not
  to impute the Sedition to the City: to which the Ambassador smartly
  answered, That he hardly knew how to call that a City, or even a
  Society of Rational Creatures, which was seemingly divested both of
  Humanity and Government.

[Illustration: THE TRUE MANER OF THE EXECUTION OF THOMAS EARLE OF
STRAFFORD. LORD Lieutenant of Ireland. upon Towerhill, the 12^{th} of
May, 1641.

From a contemporary Dutch print. E. Gardner’s Collection.]

[Illustration: THOMAS WENTWORTH, FIRST EARL OF STRAFFORD (1593–1641)

From the portrait by Sir Anthony Van Dyck.]

  The Mayor, to extenuate the Crime as much as possible, told the
  Ambassador, That the People were enraged because Mass was publicly
  said in his Chapel. To which he replied, That the English Minister
  at Madrid enjoyed the free Exercise of his Religion without the
  least Disturbance; and that he would rather choose to lose his
  Life than the Privileges